README.md, before:

# Hyperlane integration proof-of-concept

Example of an integration of hyperlane with Espresso.

# Development environment

Everytime you open a terminal run

```bash
> ./launch_shell
```

# AWS configuration

The validator and the relayer use AWS services.

## Create IAM user

1. Go to [aws.amazon.com](aws.amazon.com) and login.
1. Go to AWS's Identity and Access Management (IAM)
1. On the left, under "Access management", click "Policies".
1. Click "Create policy"
1. In the tab "Policy editor" click "JSON"
1. Copy the content of `aws/user-policy.json` inside the editor.
1. Click "Next".
1. Add a policy name (Field below "Policy details"), e.g "hyperlane-policy-XYZ"
1. Click create policy.
1. Go back to IAM home page 
1. On the left, under "Access management", click "Users".
1. Click the orange button "Create user".
1. Pick a friendly and informative username, like *hyperlane1*. 
1. Select "Attach policies directly". 
1. Select the policy you created above using its name, e.g. "hyperlane-policy-XYZ".
1. Click on "Create user"
1. Click on the user you created.
1. Click on "Security credentials"
1. Scroll down to "Access Keys" and click on "Create Access Key"
1. Select "Application running outside AWS" and click "Next"
1. Click "Next", no need to add a description tag
1. Click "Create access key"
1. Copy the "Access key ID" and "Secret access key" to a safe place.
1. Go to the IAM home and copy the Account ID (see panel "AWS Account" at the top right)
1. Identify your AWS region: Check at the beginning of the url e.g.: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon means your region is *us-east-1*.
    
Set the following environment variables:

```bash
./launch_shell
export AWS_USER_NAME=<Copy the name chosen in step 13>
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<Access key ID obtained in step 23>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<Access secret key obyained in step 12>
export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=<Copy the account id obtained in step 24>
export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=<See step 25>
```

## Create KMS key

Pick some alias for the key, define the AWS region name
```bash
export VALIDATOR_KEY_ALIAS=<validator signer key alias>
```

Create the signing key using aws cli:
```bash
> ./aws/create_kms_signing_key.sh
 Signing key created correctly
 {
    "KeyMetadata": {
        "AWSAccountId": "861012453243",
        "KeyId": "b661293a-6ead-452b-86e2-401c1d841e4e",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:861012453243:key/b661293a-6ead-452b-86e2-401c1d841e4e",
        "CreationDate": "2025-02-26T14:42:10.458000-03:00",
        "Enabled": true,
        "Description": "",
        "KeyUsage": "SIGN_VERIFY",
        "KeyState": "Enabled",
        "Origin": "AWS_KMS",
        "KeyManager": "CUSTOMER",
        "CustomerMasterKeySpec": "ECC_SECG_P256K1",
        "KeySpec": "ECC_SECG_P256K1",
        "SigningAlgorithms": [
            "ECDSA_SHA_256"
        ],
        "MultiRegion": false
    }
}
```

Update some environment variables.

```bash
> export AWS_KMS_KEY_ID=alias/$VALIDATOR_KEY_ALIAS
> export VALIDATOR_ADDRESS=`cast wallet address --aws`
> echo $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS
0xD6B7F5858E3e.... 
```

## Generate the S3 bucket

Create the bucket and configure the policy of the bucket.
```
> export VALIDATOR_BUCKET_NAME=<pick a bucket name>
> ./aws/create_bucket.sh 
```

# Initialize the chains with the Hyperlane contracts

Do a bit of cleanup if you already followed the steps of this document.
```bash
./cleanup.sh
```

Open new terminal and launch the source chain:
```bash
./launch_shell.sh
./launch_source_chain.sh
```

Open new terminal and launch the destination chain:
```bash
./launch_shell.sh
./launch_destination_chain.sh
```

Note that the  `HYP_KEY` environment variable is set in the hookShell of nix to the first private key generated by Anvil.
This key will be used to deploy the Hyperlane contracts.

*TODO:* automate answering to the questions.

Register the chains before Hyperlane can deploy its contracts.

Go back to the terminal you used to create the AWS signing key and buckets.
First the source chain:
```bash
> hyperlane registry init

? Detected rpc url as http://localhost:8545 from JSON RPC provider, is this
correct? [PUSH ENTER]
? Enter chain name (one word, lower case) source
? Enter chain display name (Source) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected chain id as 31337 from JSON RPC provider, is this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this chain a testnet (a chain used for testing & development)? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Select the chain technical stack (Use arrow keys) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected starting block number for indexing as 30 from JSON RPC provider, is
this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to add a block explorer config for this chain (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set block or gas properties for this chain config (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set native token properties for this chain config (defaults to 
ETH) (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Then the destination chain:
```bash
> hyperlane registry init
? Detected rpc url as http://localhost:8545 from JSON RPC provider, is this
correct? n
? Enter http or https rpc url: (http://localhost:8545) http://localhost:8546
? Enter chain name (one word, lower case) destination
? Enter chain display name (Destination) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected chain id as 31337 from JSON RPC provider, is this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this chain a testnet (a chain used for testing & development)? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Select the chain technical stack (Use arrow keys) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected starting block number for indexing as 30 from JSON RPC provider, is
this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to add a block explorer config for this chain (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set block or gas properties for this chain config (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set native token properties for this chain config (defaults to
ETH) (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Note that it is not necessary to initialize the configuration of the core contracts because it is already hardcoded in `configs/core-config.yaml`.
However, this file depends on the agents' address and thus needs to be generated with the following command:

```
> ./create_contracts_config.sh
OK
```

Note that this configuration considers a default ISM using a multisig of a single signer. 

Deploy the Hyperlane contracts on the source chain.
```bash
> hyperlane core deploy -o configs/core-config.yaml 
? Select network type (Use arrow keys) [PICK Testnet]
? Select chain to connect: [TYPE source]
? Do you want to use an API key to verify on this (source) chain's block 
explorer (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this deployment plan correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Deploy the Hyperlane contracts on the destination chain.
```bash
> hyperlane core deploy -o configs/core-config.yaml
? Select network type (Use arrow keys) [PICK Testnet]
? Select chain to connect: [TYPE destination]
? Do you want to use an API key to verify on this (source) chain's block 
explorer (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this deployment plan correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Deploy the Espresso app contracts on both chains:
```bash
./deploy_espresso_app_contracts.sh
```

# Spin up a validator and a relayer

Send the validator some ethers from the first private key generated by anvil. Recall the validator address was generated above.
```bash
> cast send  $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS --value 1ether --private-key $HYP_KEY
```

Create the validator configuration file. Be sure all the environment variables mentioned above are correctly set. 
```
> ./create_agent_config.sh
OK
```

Launch the validator docker
```bash
> docker compose --env-file .env up source-validator -d
```

Check everything works, that is there are no ugly error messages.
```bash
> docker logs -f source-validator 
```

Send the relayer some ethers on the **destination** chain.
Note the validator and relayer use the same address. *TODO* change this at some point.
```
> cast send  $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS --value 1ether --private-key $HYP_KEY --rpc-url http://localhost:8546
```

Launch the relayer docker.
```bash
> docker compose --env-file .env up relayer -d
```

Check everything works, that is there are no ugly error messages.
```bash
> docker logs -f relayer 
```

# Sending messages

## Send a test message between two chains

Send a test message from the source chain to the destination chain.
```bash
> hyperlane send message
  [ SELECT Testnet > source ]
  [ SELECT Testnet > destination ]
 ...   
Waiting for message delivery on destination chain...
Message 0x4c3794595f32d13fb8bd27dc783d79eae4ffd4568b778182332ea1db81024025 was processed
All messages processed for tx 0xeca30dd44c3a3a765a0d73f58b64449260134c3d029e3492f6c37e23cceb16de
```

## Send a message between Espresso apps deployed on different chains

```bash
> ./send_message.sh
```


# References

[Configuration reference](https://docs.hyperlane.xyz/docs/operate/config-reference)

Commit message:

Espresso apps sending messages between each other is working.

README.md, after:

# Hyperlane integration proof-of-concept

Example of an integration of hyperlane with Espresso.

# Development environment

Everytime you open a terminal run

```bash
> ./launch_shell.sh
```

# AWS configuration

The validator and the relayer use AWS services.

## Create IAM user

1. Go to [aws.amazon.com](aws.amazon.com) and login.
1. Go to AWS's Identity and Access Management (IAM)
1. On the left, under "Access management", click "Policies".
1. Click "Create policy"
1. In the tab "Policy editor" click "JSON"
1. Copy the content of `aws/user-policy.json` inside the editor.
1. Click "Next".
1. Add a policy name (Field below "Policy details"), e.g "hyperlane-policy-XYZ"
1. Click create policy.
1. Go back to IAM home page 
1. On the left, under "Access management", click "Users".
1. Click the orange button "Create user".
1. Pick a friendly and informative username, like *hyperlane1*. 
1. Select "Attach policies directly". 
1. Select the policy you created above using its name, e.g. "hyperlane-policy-XYZ".
1. Click on "Create user"
1. Click on the user you created.
1. Click on "Security credentials"
1. Scroll down to "Access Keys" and click on "Create Access Key"
1. Select "Application running outside AWS" and click "Next"
1. Click "Next", no need to add a description tag
1. Click "Create access key"
1. Copy the "Access key ID" and "Secret access key" to a safe place.
1. Go to the IAM home and copy the Account ID (see panel "AWS Account" at the top right)
1. Identify your AWS region: Check at the beginning of the url e.g.: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon means your region is *us-east-1*.
    
Set the following environment variables:

```bash
./launch_shell
export AWS_USER_NAME=<Copy the name chosen in step 13>
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<Access key ID obtained in step 23>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<Access secret key obyained in step 12>
export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID=<Copy the account id obtained in step 24>
export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=<See step 25>
```

## Create KMS key

Pick some alias for the key, define the AWS region name
```bash
export VALIDATOR_KEY_ALIAS=<validator signer key alias>
```

Create the signing key using aws cli:
```bash
> ./aws/create_kms_signing_key.sh
 Signing key created correctly
 {
    "KeyMetadata": {
        "AWSAccountId": "861012453243",
        "KeyId": "b661293a-6ead-452b-86e2-401c1d841e4e",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:861012453243:key/b661293a-6ead-452b-86e2-401c1d841e4e",
        "CreationDate": "2025-02-26T14:42:10.458000-03:00",
        "Enabled": true,
        "Description": "",
        "KeyUsage": "SIGN_VERIFY",
        "KeyState": "Enabled",
        "Origin": "AWS_KMS",
        "KeyManager": "CUSTOMER",
        "CustomerMasterKeySpec": "ECC_SECG_P256K1",
        "KeySpec": "ECC_SECG_P256K1",
        "SigningAlgorithms": [
            "ECDSA_SHA_256"
        ],
        "MultiRegion": false
    }
}
```

Update some environment variables.

```bash
> export AWS_KMS_KEY_ID=alias/$VALIDATOR_KEY_ALIAS
> export VALIDATOR_ADDRESS=`cast wallet address --aws`
> echo $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS
0xD6B7F5858E3e.... 
```

## Generate the S3 bucket

Create the bucket and configure the policy of the bucket.
```
> export VALIDATOR_BUCKET_NAME=<pick a bucket name>
> ./aws/create_bucket.sh 
```

# Initialize the chains with the Hyperlane contracts

Do a bit of cleanup if you already followed the steps of this document.
```bash
./cleanup.sh
```

Open new terminal and launch the source chain:
```bash
./launch_shell.sh
./launch_source_chain.sh
```

Open new terminal and launch the destination chain:
```bash
./launch_shell.sh
./launch_destination_chain.sh
```

Note that the  `HYP_KEY` environment variable is set in the hookShell of nix to the first private key generated by Anvil.
This key will be used to deploy the Hyperlane contracts.

*TODO:* automate answering to the questions.

Register the chains before Hyperlane can deploy its contracts.

Go back to the terminal you used to create the AWS signing key and buckets.
First the source chain:
```bash
> hyperlane registry init

? Detected rpc url as http://localhost:8545 from JSON RPC provider, is this
correct? [PUSH ENTER]
? Enter chain name (one word, lower case) source
? Enter chain display name (Source) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected chain id as 31337 from JSON RPC provider, is this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this chain a testnet (a chain used for testing & development)? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Select the chain technical stack (Use arrow keys) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected starting block number for indexing as 30 from JSON RPC provider, is
this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to add a block explorer config for this chain (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set block or gas properties for this chain config (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set native token properties for this chain config (defaults to 
ETH) (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Then the destination chain:
```bash
> hyperlane registry init
? Detected rpc url as http://localhost:8545 from JSON RPC provider, is this
correct? n
? Enter http or https rpc url: (http://localhost:8545) http://localhost:8546
? Enter chain name (one word, lower case) destination
? Enter chain display name (Destination) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected chain id as 31337 from JSON RPC provider, is this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this chain a testnet (a chain used for testing & development)? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Select the chain technical stack (Use arrow keys) [PUSH ENTER]
? Detected starting block number for indexing as 30 from JSON RPC provider, is
this correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to add a block explorer config for this chain (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set block or gas properties for this chain config (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Do you want to set native token properties for this chain config (defaults to
ETH) (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Note that it is not necessary to initialize the configuration of the core contracts because it is already hardcoded in `configs/core-config.yaml`.
However, this file depends on the agents' addresses and thus needs to be generated with the following command:

```
> ./create_contracts_config.sh
OK
```

Note that this configuration considers a default ISM using a multisig of a single signer. 

Deploy the Hyperlane contracts on the source chain.
```bash
> hyperlane core deploy -o configs/core-config.yaml 
? Select network type (Use arrow keys) [PICK Testnet]
? Select chain to connect: [TYPE source]
? Do you want to use an API key to verify on this (source) chain's block 
explorer (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this deployment plan correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Deploy the Hyperlane contracts on the destination chain.
```bash
> hyperlane core deploy -o configs/core-config.yaml
? Select network type (Use arrow keys) [PICK Testnet]
? Select chain to connect: [TYPE destination]
? Do you want to use an API key to verify on this (source) chain's block 
explorer (y/N) [PUSH ENTER]
? Is this deployment plan correct? (Y/n) [PUSH ENTER]
```

Deploy the Espresso app contracts on both chains:
```bash
> ./deploy_espresso_app_contracts.sh

```

# Spin up a validator and a relayer

Send the validator some ethers from the first private key generated by anvil. Recall the validator address was generated above.
```bash
> cast send  $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS --value 1ether --private-key $HYP_KEY
```

Create the validator configuration file. Be sure all the environment variables mentioned above are correctly set. 
```
> ./create_agent_config.sh
OK
```

Launch the validator docker
```bash
> docker compose --env-file .env up source-validator -d
```

Check everything works, that is there are no ugly error messages.
```bash
> docker logs -f source-validator 
```

Send the relayer some ethers on the **destination** chain.
Note the validator and relayer use the same address. *TODO* change this at some point.
```
> cast send  $VALIDATOR_ADDRESS --value 1ether --private-key $HYP_KEY --rpc-url http://localhost:8546
```

Launch the relayer docker.
```bash
> docker compose --env-file .env up relayer -d
```

Check everything works, that is there are no ugly error messages.
```bash
> docker logs -f relayer 
```

# Sending messages

## Send a test message between two chains

Send a test message from the source chain to the destination chain.
```bash
> hyperlane send message
  [ SELECT Testnet > source ]
  [ SELECT Testnet > destination ]
 ...   
Waiting for message delivery on destination chain...
Message 0x4c3794595f32d13fb8bd27dc783d79eae4ffd4568b778182332ea1db81024025 was processed
All messages processed for tx 0xeca30dd44c3a3a765a0d73f58b64449260134c3d029e3492f6c37e23cceb16de
```

## Send a message between Espresso apps deployed on different chains

Check the counter value on the destination app before sending the message

```bash
> ./check_counter_destination_chain.sh 
Warning: This is a nightly build of Foundry. It is recommended to use the latest stable version. Visit https://book.getfoundry.sh/announcements for more information. 
To mute this warning set `FOUNDRY_DISABLE_NIGHTLY_WARNING` in your environment. 

0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000002
```

```bash
> ./send_message.sh
```


Wait a few seconds and check the counter value on the destination app again. It should be incremented by one.

```bash
> ./check_counter_destination_chain.sh 
Warning: This is a nightly build of Foundry. It is recommended to use the latest stable version. Visit https://book.getfoundry.sh/announcements for more information. 
To mute this warning set `FOUNDRY_DISABLE_NIGHTLY_WARNING` in your environment. 

0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000003
```

# References

[Configuration reference](https://docs.hyperlane.xyz/docs/operate/config-reference)
